Don't Shoot the Dog - Karen Pryor  August 17th 2016

Behavior modification through signaling and positive reinforcement and not shooting dogs.

Sometimes you read a book and you think: "This is going to change my life" and then you think: "...maybe". 

 This is one of those books. This book present an intriguing somewhat implicit response to the question:

How do I act better?
How do I get the people and animals and maybe even groups of people around me to act (subjectively)better?

The only one of those questions that this book goes into explicit practical detail on is: "How do I get animals to act better?".  Working on other people is discussed decently, though no systematic means of behavior modification is really discussed beyond single one-off solutions to situations, and behavior modification of groups is purely my own extrapolation from the material. The idea of being able to, with intention, apply these principles not only to individuals but associations of individuals such as companies, schools, even cities, nations, cultures to set about defining goals and the creating a practical plan to achieving them is, I think, a pretty interesting idea that deserves further exploration. 


The take away from this is 

One: If you have dogs or small children, assuming everything in the book is accurate,  learning and applying these techniques would seem almost mandatory. I don't have either, though I almost want to get a pet just to try these things out. If you don't have either of those things the take away is murkier but almost more promising. The reason I wanted to read the book was largely to understand how to change myself; how to do less stupid, counterproductive , things and more things that align and work towards my long term goals. This is somewhat where the book fell short, through no fault of its own (it is a book written by an animal trainer on how to train dogs). 

What I wanted from it was a well developed and tested toolkit on how to identify and either correct or encourage productive or counterproductive personal behaviors, including, thoughts, feelings, habits, etcetera. I did not get that book but this book made me convinced that the book I am looking for either exists or needs to.

Lastly I want to address morals and manipulation. Behavior modification could be seen as manipulative and, from a literal standpoint, it is. But so is everything else, we are constantly trying to change ourselves, those around us, and society as a whole.  We just aren't very good at it. Because we are not good at it we end up resorting to the crudest, least effective, most destructive methods of correction, namely punishment and violence. If something or someone doesn't do what we want , when we run out of a better plan, we start breaking things. That may be a toddler screaming on the floor of a market because he can't have what he wants,  a spouse resorting to domestic violence because he or she doesn't know any other way, or a suicide bomber trying to stop the world from working the way it does using the only means he thinks he has left to him.  

The somewhat surprising, and I would say moral, thing about Don't Shoot the Dog is its emphasis on the notion that behavior modification through positive reinforcement  is itself, by definition, rewarding. It's fun. You set goals, you are constantly rewarding yourself and others for meeting those goals in a highly engaging manner that is extremely similar to, if not essentially the same thing  as, play. The idea that we could move to a world where all instruction, all solutions to personal, relationship and even societal problems could be address in this way is a highly appealing thought.

The concern of course is that these techniques could be used by parties whose interests are opposed to ours and could be used to manipulate us. And of course this is already the case.

Why I think we punish instead of reward: Punishment is easy because it is retroactive. It responds to the undesired behavior. Reinforcement is hard because it requires imagining and responding to something that hasn't happened yet, the desired behavior.

TLDR:

• Reward is better than punishment
	○ It encourages acting in a specific way. 
	○ Punishment simply teaches the trainee how to avoid punishment (or the punisher/training).
• Earning Rewards should be signaled as close to the behavior as possible
• Reward schedules should be randomized and variable
